madhyodbhave bhuva ilāvṛtanāmni varṣe
gaurīpradhānavanitājanamātrabhāji |
śarveṇa mantranutibhi: samupāsyamānaṃ
saṅkarṣaṇātmakamadhīśvara saṃśraye tvām ||1||
madhya-udbhave bhuva:	in the middle of the earth
ilāvṛta-nāmni varṣe	in the region called Ilaavrata
gaurī-pradhāna-vanitājana-mātra-bhāji	Gauri as their chief, inhabited solely by women
śarveṇa	by Lord Shiva (as Ardhnaareeshwara)
mantra-nutibhi:	by mantras and hymns
samupāsyamānaṃ	(Thou) being worshipped
saṅkarṣaṇa-ātmakam-	in the form of Sankarshana
adhīśvara	O Almighty Lord!
saṃśraye	(I) seek refuge (in)
tvām	Thee
In the middle of the earth is the region called Ilaavrata which is inhabited exclusively by women with Gauri as their chief. I seek refuge in Thee O Lord! Who are present there as Sankarshana and are worshipped with holy chants by Sharva (Shiva) in his 'man-woman' form known as Ardhanaareeshwara.
bhadrāśvanāmaka ilāvṛtapūrvavarṣe
bhadraśravobhi: ṛṣibhi: pariṇūyamānam |
kalpāntagūḍhanigamoddharaṇapravīṇaṃ
dhyāyāmi deva hayaśīrṣatanuṃ bhavantam ||2||
bhadrāśva-nāmaka	(known) by rhe name Bhadraashva
ilāvṛta-pūrva-varṣe	in the region east of Ilaavrata
bhadraśravobhi: ṛṣibhi:	(where) by the Rishis known as Bhadraashwaras
pariṇūyamānam	praised (Thou)
kalpānta-gūḍha-nigama-uddharaṇa-pravīṇaṃ	at the end of the Kalpa, (which were) lost, the Vedas, in restoring, who is expert, (Thou),
dhyāyāmi	I meditate on (Thee)
deva	O Lord!
hayaśīrṣa-tanuṃ bhavantam	Thou who has taken the form of Hayagreeva
In the region known as Bhadraashva, situated to the east of Ilaavrata, O Lord! Thou resides as Hayagreeva. I meditate on this horse-necked form of Thine which is famed as the restorer of the Vedas lost in the deluge at the end of the cosmic cycle. This Hayagreeva form of Thine is worshipped by the Rishis Bhadraashwara with hymns of praises.
dhyāyāmi dakṣiṇagate harivarṣavarṣe
prahlādamukhyapuruṣai: pariṣevyamāṇam |
uttuṅgaśāntadhavalākṛtimekaśuddha-
jñānapradaṃ narahariṃ bhagavan bhavantam ||3||
dhyāyāmi	I meditate (on Thee)
dakṣiṇagate harivarṣavarṣe	towards the south (of Ilaavrata) in Harivarsha
prahlāda-mukhya-puruṣai:	by Prahlaad and other leading people
pariṣevyamāṇam	(being) worshipped
uttuṅga-dhavala-ākṛtim-	(as one) who is very tall, calm and white in color
ekaśuddha-jñāna-pradam	who bestows the highest pure knowledge
narahariṃ	in the form of Narahari
bhagavan	O Lord!
bhavantaṃ	Thee (I meditate on)
To the south of Ilaavrata is Harivarsha. There Thou are worshipped by Prahlaad and other leading devotees as Narahari, whose body is tall and white and who is calm and bestows the knowledge of Supreme Brahman. O Lord! I meditate on that form of Thee.
varṣe pratīci lalitātmani ketumāle
līlāviśeṣalalitasmitaśobhanāṅgam |
lakṣmyā prajāpatisutaiśca niṣevyamāṇaṃ
tasyā: priyāya dhṛtakāmatanuṃ bhaje tvām ||4||
varṣe pratīci	in the region to the west of Ilaavrata
lalita-ātmani	in the very beautiful
ketumāle	Ketumaala
līlā-viśeṣa-lalita-smita-śobhana-aṅgam	with a divine sporting and charming smile, having a resplendent form (Thou)
lakṣmyā	by Lakshmi
prajāpatisutai: ca	and by the sons of Prajaapati
niṣevyamāṇam	worshipped
tasyā: priyāya	for her pleasure
dhṛta-kāma-tanum	taking the form of Kaamadeva
bhaje tvām	I worship Thee
To the west of Ilaavrata, in the beautiful region of Ketumaalaa, Thou resides as Kaamadeva, for the pleasure of Lakshmi. Thy form is resplendent with a divine sportive and charming smile. Thou are worshipped by Lakshmi and the sons of Prajaapati. I worship Thee.
ramye hyudīci khalu ramyakanāmni varṣe
tadvarṣanāthamanuvaryasaparyamāṇam |
bhaktaikavatsalamamatsarahṛtsu bhāntaṃ
matsyākṛtiṃ bhuvananātha bhaje bhavantam ||5||
ramye hi udīci khalu	In the beautiful (region) to the north of Ilaavrata
ramyaka-nāmni varṣe	in the region called Ramyak
tat-varṣa-nātha-manuvarya-	by that region's ruler, Manu
saparyamāṇam	(Thou) being worshipped
bhakta-eka-vatsalam-	(Thou) who is benevolent to His devotees
amatsara-hṛtsu bhantaṃ	in the hearts of all pure hearted people (thou) who shines,
matsya-ākṛtiṃ	in a fish form
bhuvananātha	O Lord of the Universe!
bhaje bhavantaṃ	I worship Thee
In the beautiful region of Ramyak to the north of Ilaavrata whose ruler Vaivaswata Manu worships Thee in Thy form of a fish. Thou who are very benevolent to Thy devotees and who shine in the hearts of those who are free from attachments, I worship Thee in the form of the fish.
varṣaṃ hiraṇmayasamāhvayamauttarāha-
māsīnamadridhṛtikarmaṭhakāmaṭhāṅgam |
saṃsevate pitṛgaṇapravaro'ryamā yaṃ
taṃ tvāṃ bhajāmi bhagavan paracinmayātman ||6||
varṣaṃ	the region
hiraṇmaya-samāhvayam-	Hiranmaya', known as
auttarāham-	to the north (of Ramyak)
āsīnam-	residing there
adri-dhṛti-karmaṭha-kāmaṭha-aṅgam	the mountain (Mandaar) bearing, capable of, in the form of the tortoise, on the back
saṃsevate	who is worshipped by
pitṛgaṇa-pravara:-aryamā	the chief of the Pitriganas, Aryamaa,
yaṃ taṃ tvāṃ	Which,That Thee
bhajāmi bhagavan	I worship O Lord!
paracinmaya-ātman	O Supreme Light of Consciousness!
The region called Hiranmaya which is to the north of Ramyak, Thou reside there in the form of the huge tortoise that could bear the Mandara mountain on its back. There Thou are worshipped by Aryamaa the famous chief of the Pitris. O Lord! O Supreme Pure Consciousness! I worship Thy that form.
kiñcottareṣu kuruṣu priyayā dharaṇyā
saṃsevito mahitamantranutiprabhedai: |
daṃṣṭrāgraghṛṣṭaghanapṛṣṭhagariṣṭhavarṣmā
tvaṃ pāhi bijñanuta yajñavarāhamūrte ||7||
kim-ca	further
uttareṣu	to the north (of Hiranmaya)
kuruṣu	(in the region known as) in Kuru
priyayā dharaṇyā	by Thy consort the Earth
saṃsevita:	well worshipped
mahita-mantra-nuti-prabhedai:	by various great mantras and hymns
daṃṣṭra-agra-ghṛṣṭa-ghana-pṛṣṭha-gariṣṣṭha-varṣmā	(Thou whose) tusks' ends touched the clouds with such a huge body
tvaṃ pāhi	Thou protect me
vijña-nuta yajña-varāha-mūrte	by the enlightened ones adored, (O Thou) in the form of the Yanjya Varaaha
To the north of Hiranmaya, Thou are worshipped by Thy dear consort the Earth, with the utterances of holy Mantras and hymns of praise. Thou are adored by the wise in the form of Yanjya Varaaha (the divine boar) whose gigantic body rose so high that the tusks' edges rubbed against the clouds. Do protect Thy devotees.
yāmyāṃ diśaṃ bhajati kiṃpuruṣākhyavarṣe
saṃsevito hanumatā dṛḍhabhaktibhājā |
sītābhirāmaparamādbhutarūpaśālī
rāmātmaka: parilasan paripāhi viṣṇo ||8||
yāmyāṃ diśaṃ bhajati	situated to the south (of Ilaavrata)
kiṃpuruṣa-ākhya-varṣe	'Kimpurusha', known as, in that region
saṃsevita:	worshipped
hanumatā	by Hanumaan
dṛḍha-bhaktibhājā	who has firm devotion to Thee
sītā-abhirāma-parama-adbhuta-rūpa-śālī	(and) Sita is captivated by (Thy) form which is most wonderful and resplendent
ramātmaka: parilasan	as Raama shining
paripāhi	do protect
viṣṇo	O Lord! Vishnu!
Towards the south of Ilaavrata, residing in the region known as Kimpurusha, Thou are worshipped by Hanumaan with firm and unwavering devotion. O Lord Vishnu! Thou as Raama do shine with a wonderful and resplendent form form that captivates Sita and is made more charming by her presence. Do protect us, O Vishnu!
śrīnāradena saha bhāratakhaṇḍamukhyai-
stvaṃ sāṅkhyayoganutibhi: samupāsyamāna: |
ākalpakālamiha sādhujanābhirakṣī
nārāyaṇo narasakha: paripāhi bhūman ||9||
śrī-nāradena saha	along with Shree Naarada
bhārata-khaṇḍa-mukhyai:-	by the foremost (devotees) of Bhaaratavarsha
tvaṃ	Thou
sāṃkhya-yoga-nutibhi:	with the hymns based on Saankhya and Yoga systems
samupāsyamāna:	well meditated upon
ākalpa-kālam-iha	till Pralaya time, here (in Bhaaratavarsha)
sādhujana-abhirakṣī	the virtuous protecting,
nārāyaṇa: narasakha:	(Thou) Naaraayana (who has) and Nara as companion
paripāhi	do protect
bhūman	O Lord of the Universe!
Along with Naarada, by the leading devotees of Bhaarata region Thou are meditated upon and praised with hymns based on Saankhya and Yoga. In Bhaaratavarsha as Naaraayana with Nara as companion, Thou do reside till Pralaya (deluge) time,for the protection of the virtuous. Deign to protect all devotees.
plākṣe'rkarūpamayi śālmala indurūpaṃ
dvīpe bhajanti kuśanāmani vahnirūpam |
krauñce'mburūpamatha vāyumayaṃ ca śāke
tvāṃ brahmarūpamapi puṣkaranāmni lokā: ||10||
plākṣe-arka-rūpam-	in Plaaksha, in the form of the Sun
ayi	O Thou!
śālmale indurūpaṃ	in Shaalmala, in the form of the moon
dvīpe bhajanti kuśa-nāmani	in the island named Kusha, people worship,
vahni-rūpam	(Thee) in the form of Fire
krauñce-ambu-rūpam-	in Kraunch as water
atha vāyu-mayaṃ ca śāke	and then as wind in Shaaka
tvāṃ brahma-rūpam-api	Thee also in the form of Brahmaa
puṣkara-nāmni lokā:	in (the place) called Pushkara by people (are worshipped)
O Lord! Thou are worshipped by the people in the form of the sun in Plaaksha, as the Moon in Shaalmala, as fire in Kushadveep, as water in Kraunch, as wind in Shaaka and as Brahmaa in the place named Pushkara.
sarvairdhruvādibhiruḍuprakarairgrahaiśca
pucchādikeṣvavayaveṣvabhikalpyamānai: |
tvaṃ śiṃśumāravapuṣā mahatāmupāsya:
sandhyāsu rundhi narakaṃ mama sindhuśāyin ||11||
sarbai:-dhruva-ādibhi:-uḍuprakarai:-	by all, Dhruva etc., the groups of stars
grahai:-ca	and by the planets
puccha-ādikeṣu avayaveṣu-	as tail etc., in the limbs
abhikalpyamānai:	imagined
tvaṃ śiṃśumāra-vapuṣā	Thou, the great Fish Sinshumaar bodied
mahatām-upāsya:	by the enlightened meditated upon
sandhyāsu	at the (three) Sandhyaas
rundhi narakaṃ mama	eradicate hell (sufferings) of mine
sindhuśāyin	O Resident of the Milk Ocean
Dhruva - the Pole star, and all the groups of stars and planets who are imagined as forming the limbs and tail of the great Fish Shinshumaar, in that form , Thou are meditated upon by the enlightened ones, at the three Sandhyaas. O Lord! Reposing on the Milk Ocean! deign to eradicate my suffering and my sins.
pātālamūlabhuvi śeṣatanuṃ bhavantaṃ
lolaikakuṇḍalavirājisahasraśīrṣam |
nīlāmbaraṃ dhṛtahalaṃ bhujagāṅganābhi-
rjuṣṭaṃ bhaje hara gadān gurugehanātha ||12||
pātāla-mūla-bhuvi	of Paataala's bottom surface
śeṣa-tanuṃ bhavantaṃ	in Aadishesha's form, Thee
lola-aika-kuṇḍala-virāji-sahasra-śīrṣam	(weith)dangling one earring and shining in the thousand heads
nīlāmbaraṃ	wearring a blue garment
dhṛta-halaṃ	armed with a plough
bhujaga-aṅganābhi:-juṣṭaṃ	by serpent women worshipped
bhaje	I adore
śeṣatanuṃ bhavantaṃ	the Aadishesha bodied Thee
hara gadān	eradicate my ailments
gurugehanātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
I worship Thee as Aadishesha the great serpent. Thou residing at the bottom of Paataal, having a thousand heads, which shine with a single ever quivering earing, wearing a blue garment, and having a plough as weapon, are worshipped by Naaga (serpent) damsels. May Thou O Lord of Guruvaayur be pleased to relieve me of my ailments.